well let's now speak to Gabriel Lando he
joins me now from un headquarters in New
York Gabe from yesterday to today to
tomorrow we keep hearing about endless
delays seemingly does this mean that
given all the the negotiations behind
closed doors that there is a desire to
try to move to something particularly on
the part of the us that it won't
veto I think so I mean uh a lot of these
negotiations are taking place behind
closed doors so we can't get a clear
sense of what's being discussed of
course but one thing is very clear that
it is the US that is holding this up and
we're hearing now uh late on Tuesday
it's now two issues we thought it was
one now we think it's two the first one
is this language about the cessation of
hostilities uh that was the first
language put in the first draft by the
United Arab Emirates uh and then the US
said we're not going to go for that
because it seems like it's it's almost
like a ceasefire language there the US
will not go for that so they changed it
of course to the
suspension of hostilities it has a
little bit more temporary framing to it
we thought the US would go for that but
apparently uh there are still some
problems with that language as well
Reuters is now reporting Tuesday evening
and our sources at Al jazer are
confirming our diplomatic sources that
now there is a second issue as well and
that comes down to a monitoring
mechanism that is in this resolution
it's calling for the United Nations to
take control of monitoring the aid
coming in and also monitoring its
distribution as well and it appears that
the US also has some issues with that as
well oh very interesting well you talked
there about Aid Gabe this is intended
primarily as a humanitarian resolution
tell us what the the current draft might
include well it is humanitarian
resolution first and foremost that's
what all the diplomats that support this
which are is the most the majority of
the council says and we heard that from
the ambassador to the UAE as well to the
un uh it is calling for a huge scaling
up of Aid by all means necessary
particularly air air land and sea and
again it's not only scaling up that Aid
this monitoring mechanism is key as well
because this resolution is saying we
want this Aid going into Gaz and we want
it going in Fast and efficiently but
we're not just going to leave it up to
Israel uh to monitor that this
monitoring mechanism would then put the
Honus on the United Nations to really uh
uh check that Aid get it into the
country uh quickly to those that need it
the most so it's very multipronged
approach here uh but clearly there are
still some real issues here we are now
hearing that the earliest that this
resolution could go up up to a vote now
would be Wednesday at 11:00 a.m. eastern
time here in New York that's about 16
GMT bottom line is this ultimately the
person that will be making the decision
for the United States on this will be
President Joe Biden he will ultimately
make the call if he demands that his
diplomats veto this resolution or not
well we'll be watching that vote if it
happens very very closely then indeed
for now Gabriel Alando at the United
Nations thank you Gabe
well let's bring in Ry imay he is a
professor of international law at Queens
University he joins us from Ottawa RI
all of these delays these repeated
delays what do you think we should be
reading into
them I think it's very clear um yet
again it's a failure um by the United
Nations security Council to shoulder its
burden to maintain International Peace
and security and most importantly under
threat of a US veto which continues to
provide the occupying power with the
space the time and indeed the weapons to
bombard starve and ultimately ethnically
cleanse the Palestinian people out of
Gaza well do you think that there's
potentially more pressure on the US
right now and that's why this has gone
on for so long behind closed doors in
terms of negotiations rather than just
coming to the council and then vetoing
it there may very well be internal
discussions happening with the United
States I understand uh and this is
speculation on my part um that there
might be a difference of opinion between
say the White House and certain elements
in the state department and maybe even
the US mission to the United Nations in
New York but at bottom the reason why
there's this why there may be a
difference of opinion in the United
States um is quite frankly because of
the unhealthy relationship that they
share with the occupying power which has
put the United States and Israel and
maybe a few other states out on on a
limb Vis the rest of the International
Community which is calling
overwhelmingly for a ceasefire uh uh
which is required by by all humanitarian
means really and we saw that in the
general assembly AI if a resolution with
the current language that we're hearing
does get passed in the security Council
what do you make of the likelihood of
implementation what are the legal
requirements given that it's a security
Council
resolution well I mean any decision of
the United Nations security Council
which would come through a resolution
would be binding under international law
on all member states that would include
the occupying power um and so we only
have to wait and see what comes comes uh
out of the security Council and that is
why presumably the United States has
been really reluctant to give anything
um in any Security Council resolution of
consequence uh because then that would
bind the state of Israel I think one of
the most important things your listeners
need to be made aware of however is that
to the extent that any resolution of the
Council focuses on humanitarian Aid we
need to understand that under
international law the occupying power
may never condition humanitarian Aid to
the protected civilian population that
it occupies and so the whole idea that
there should be a quid proquo for
instance I'd heard in your segment
earlier that the prime minister or the
president of Israel indicated that they
want a humanitarian pause in order to
allow for Aid to go through no no no no
under international law the occupying
power has to give that human itarian Aid
facilitate that humanitarian aid
unencumbered for the benefit of the
civilian population subject to its
bombardment and we have quite the
opposite going on now are you've been
very very clear there the resolution
that we're talking about now is meant to
be a humanitarian resolution but there
have been multiple reports of the
Israeli Army impeding Aid into the strip
using starvation as a weapon of war is
there any legal recourse there and would
there be any legal recourse if a
resolution was passed and not
implemented
well certainly in uh your your question
covers a few areas so if a resolution is
passed and the occupying power does not
adhere to it then it's left to the
security Council to follow up and impose
measures against the occupying power
which it may do and has authority to do
uh uh under the UN Charter those
measures can include arms embargos
diplomatic uh sanctions even use of
force if indeed you can get a decision
out of the out of the security Council
which of course is virtually impossible
by virtue of the US position on the
other hand there are still options
available for the rest of the
International Community the office of
the prosecutor of the international
criminal court for instance who has made
a very important point to remind all
parties to the conflict including the
occupying power that humanitarian Aid
must flow should take action and there's
an investigation in the situation of
Palestine which he's controlling and
that action might include uh arrest
warrants indictments and so on so there
is there there are options available the
only question is is there will on the
part of those who have their fingers if
you like on the levers of power to do
anything about it um fingers crossed
that over time well rather sooner rather
than later there will be some action R
IM say there professor of international
law at Queens University always great to
get your expertise with us here on aler
thank you for joining us
aie thank you anasia bless